Statistical learning refers to a set of tools for modeling and understanding complex datasets. It is a recently developed area in statistics and blends with parallel developments in computer science and, in particular, machine learning. The field encompasses many methods such as the lasso and sparse regression, classification and regression trees, and boosting and support vector machines.
With the explosion of “Big Data” problems, statistical learning has be- come a very hot field in many scientific areas as well as marketing, finance, and other business disciplines. People with statistical learning skills are in high demand.
One of the first books in this area—The Elements of Statistical Learning (ESL) (Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman)—was published in 2001, with a second edition in 2009. ESL has become a popular text not only in statis- tics but also in related fields. One of the reasons for ESL’s popularity is its relatively accessible style. But ESL is intended for individuals with ad- vanced training in the mathematical sciences. An Introduction to Statistical Learning (ISL) arose from the perceived need for a broader and less tech- nical treatment of these topics. In this new book, we cover many of the same topics as ESL, but we concentrate more on the applications of the methods and less on the mathematical details. We have created labs illus- trating how to implement each of the statistical learning methods using the popular statistical software package R. These labs provide the reader with valuable hands-on experience.
This book is appropriate for advanced undergraduates or master’s stu- dents in statistics or related quantitative fields or for individuals in other
vii
viii Preface
disciplines who wish to use statistical learning tools to analyze their data. It can be used as a textbook for a course spanning one or two semesters.
We would like to thank several readers for valuable comments on prelim- inary drafts of this book: Pallavi Basu, Alexandra Chouldechova, Patrick Danaher, Will Fithian, Luella Fu, Sam Gross, Max Grazier G’Sell, Court- ney Paulson, Xinghao Qiao, Elisa Sheng, Noah Simon, Kean Ming Tan, and Xin Lu Tan.
Given an employee’s age, we can use this curve to predict his wage. However, it is also clear from Figure 1.1 that there is a significant amount of vari- ability associated with this average value, and so age alone is unlikely to provide an accurate prediction of a particular man’s wage.
We also have information regarding each employee’s education level and the year in which the wage was earned. The center and right-hand panels of Figure 1.1, which display wage as a function of both year and education, in- dicate that both of these factors are associated with wage. Wages increase by approximately $10,000, in a roughly linear (or straight-line) fashion, between 2003 and 2009, though this rise is very slight relative to the vari- ability in the data. Wages are also typically greater for individuals with higher education levels: men with the lowest education level (1) tend to have substantially lower wages than those with the highest education level (5). Clearly, the most accurate prediction of a given man’s wage will be obtained by combining his age, his education, and the year. In Chapter 3, we discuss linear regression, which can be used to predict wage from this data set. Ideally, we should predict wage in a way that accounts for the non-linear relationship between wage and age. In Chapter 7, we discuss a class of approaches for addressing this problem.
The left-hand panel of Figure 1.2 displays two boxplots of the previous day’s percentage changes in the stock index: one for the 648 days for which the market increased on the subsequent day, and one for the 602 days for which the market decreased. The two plots look almost identical, suggest- ing that there is no simple strategy for using yesterday’s movement in the S&P to predict today’s returns. The remaining panels, which display box- plots for the percentage changes 2 and 3 days previous to today, similarly indicate little association between past and present returns. Of course, this lack of pattern is to be expected: in the presence of strong correlations be- tween successive days’ returns, one could adopt a simple trading strategy to generate profits from the market. Nevertheless, in Chapter 4, we explore these data using several different statistical learning methods. Interestingly, there are hints of some weak trends in the data that suggest that, at least for this 5-year period, it is possible to correctly predict the direction of movement in the market approximately 60% of the time (Figure 1.3).